Oh, another guy I
met at that time was Lionel Wilson. He also came out
to the courts.
He's a black student, law student, just fresh out
of law school. And he was married to a redhead. And
lived in the same neighborhood in Oakland. And I
went over to their house, met Dorothy. And
he called me several times to want to play in
doubles. There was a tournament, so we played
several doubles in tournaments together. So he
was another one. And then there was this one
psychiatrist
who came up. Yeah,
in his second term, the mayor of Oakland. The mayor
of Oakland. So many of these people have risen to
dizzying heights. When we had the right to call
them out, Lionel and Dorothy came down at one of the
tournaments. Yeah. When I was director of tennis.
Over the last several years, we would bump into him
in celebrity tournaments. And then just
recently, Dan is sending
the postcard because he's been singing on TV. Oh,
is that right? Yeah. Yes, there is. Oh,
when I was marketing director for Brown
Construction. I knew he was mayor, I'd seen his
name at the end of the paper. I'd
sent him our packet. I
asked my boss if he thought it was a good lead in case
there was any jobs to be done in Oakland, would they
want to bid on it? And he said, yes, go ahead and mail
him our packet. So I used him as a prospect for a
construction business that I was making. But it
never
hurt. Let me ask the rest of you. Let me change the
subject for a moment and ask you about your
father's efforts to locate you. You didn't find
out about that, of course, until you got hold of
your sister. And then you found out that your
father had put ads in the paper, tried to locate
you. Do you have any, what are your feelings about
your parents? How do you think your parents felt?
They knew that you'd escaped. They were notified,
yeah. How do you think they, because they couldn't
reach you either. No, no. What do you think they
were thinking? I'm sure he's okay. He's out there
someplace. We trained him well enough so he could
survive. I hope that's what they thought. Because
my mother kept telling them, my nieces that she was
raising, he's not taught. He's not taught. And he
won't, you know, I think that's another endearing
part of my life, in a sense. That, you know, to have
parents... that cared for me, to look for me. Sure,
sure. It isn't necessarily the finding, just
sometimes, like in life, it's the pursuit of
something. That's the important part, sure. Of
course, it would be ideal if you have the pleasure
of pursuit and finding, but it feels good. And my
feeling has always been that I could see what he did
was to prepare me for all eventualities, which any
father would do, which I would do for every student
I ever had. I would prepare him whatever I teach
because I can't be there the rest of his life. But
when I teach somebody to ski, I tell him the color of
the snow. You won't find that in any book that
there's white and there's white. There's cool
white and warm white. It makes a difference on the
drag of your skis. It might save your life if you go
60 miles an hour and you go over a yellow spot
because you're going to go head over tea cattle. Or
the skis will go out from under you if you go over
blue. Right. And you've got
that training soldiers to go to Russia, training
the soldiers on the drill field. He was preparing
them. You pay $20 and I give you the best backhand in
the world.
I think that's an animalistic thing. You find it
amongst the monkeys, the guys that teach the young
chimps how to swing from tree to tree. Their
mothers tell them how to eat right and
comb their hair. and stay clean and shape up so that
they survive.
Do you have any questions? Were your dad's efforts
to find you extensive? Did they go on for years?
Yeah, evidently. And do you know whether he
advertised in newspapers in the areas where you
were and you just didn't see it, or whether he
wasn't in the right location? I personally think
he might have advertised in the San Francisco
Chronicle. that's why i thought maybe herb kane
picked up on that item but i that's just i never
found it i went to look for it i simply got dizzy
looking going back on in those years and i can't got
a headache from i tried several hours at the morgue
in san francisco to find any mention either of me or
I wasn't looking for the ad at that time, but I would
have seen, if I had seen my pictures and my name in
Germany, like I saw that on that, I mean, it always
jumps the graphics of my name. What makes you think
that it might have been in the San Francisco paper?
Because Lottie told me there were major
newspapers that he advertised in. American
newspapers. American newspapers. Maybe Los
Angeles, or it could have been Los Angeles. Wire
service. I mean, he could have seen it on a... I
mean, not in the paper itself, like you say, it
could have been a rival paper, but they get the same
information from the... Just simply ask for the
paper. Yeah, maybe someday I'll ask him if there
was an ad in it. But he wrote that. But I never
thought of running any ads in a German newspaper,
since I had given up on Europe, per se.
after I
just didn't want to return to Europe. The only
other question I had was a paranoia question. When
you married
Jean, I could see the paranoia going in two
directions, either getting worse because
suddenly you had somebody in collusion with you
that didn't know she was in collusion and so you had
to worry more, or whether since you decided to
become more stable, whether you were able to relax
and work that out. Do you remember what your
reaction was very closely on the marriage itself?
I would say... The feelings would constantly
fluctuate between the two. So both were
happening. Yes. In fact, that's probably a good
way to describe all throughout that period. The
very basic
fear and flight. The constant courage and fear.
press on and hide. And I've found out that is a very,
very basic animalistic trait that we all have.
I've probably had it more than others. But when I
was studying the psychology of a tennis match, how
to get yourself into a proper thing, you have to...
wait till you get rid of your fear before you can
make any kind of a good shot. Because as soon as the
fear creeps into your body, the chemistry, like
that match that I lost, that there's no way you
cannot, that thing is just like concrete. You've
heard of the expression, the frozen elbow or the
concrete elbow. And it isn't just, you know, it
probably was stronger than me. And it kept going
back and forth and back and forth. But it's not
unusual.
And I don't know what I'd done if it wasn't there all
the time. It must be nice, I guess. You don't have
to... Well, everybody has secrets. Everybody
has... I don't want you to think that you...
lived a relationship that nobody else
experiences. That's what I finally learned.
Everybody experiences those things. That's what
I finally learned. Just maybe the degree is
different. Or the cues. You would suspect the cues
sooner than I would. If you were starting to be
asked questions, your defenses would go up a lot
earlier than mine. Mine would go up too, and I think
most men would, to being asked certain questions.
But I think yours would go up sooner than mine.
Gene, can I ask you a couple questions? Can I ask you
to change places for a minute?
Let me ask again what
you thought when you were being rebuffed at these
various points. I mean, there has to be... You're
married to a man, all right, the marriage... You
met at the dance. You got married in October. But
still, you're dealing with somebody who's almost
a cardboard figure on occasion. In the earliest
stages of it, I really wasn't too concerned
about... I didn't have that many questions. My
primary concerns were about his health. If you're
marrying somebody, you want to be pretty
comfortable with their health, and he looked very
robust. I worked for an insurance company at that
time, and I urged him to go get an annual physical
the first year we were married. He did do that.
We were on the employee benefit plan. The doctor's
report came back through my office, kind of a
conflict of interest situation to say the least.
Professionally, I deal with it. the claims coming
in and it was my own husband and I felt like a lawyer
in a sense reading his medical report but on the
other hand I'm concerned about it because he was
virtually a stranger when I married him. We had
known each other for a long time. Nothing of his
background and at that point in time I found out
about his pneumonia. He'd never mentioned that
and in his history whatever he did to the doctor
showed up as an old some kind of old inflammatory
changes in his lungs. So I called up the doctor and I
explained to him this kind of dilemma that I was in.
New bride, here's this information, and the
doctor said, oh, don't worry about that. He said,
your husband is basically a very healthy fellow.
So I thought, okay, that's all I really need to
know. I never told him that I had seen his medical
report. You knew she had? But that's why he stalled
for going to the doctor. I know how these things...
Anyway, that kind of question. She is asking me to
take an examination. She tells me to go see the
doctor. The doctor is going to report to her.
So you suspected that you were being put up to it.
That's why I stalled. Were you being put up to it?
Did you really want to see that report? No.
Actually, I was very taken aback when the report
came through. It didn't necessarily have to come
through, but it happened to do.
Okay, so that answered the basic questions. Could
that report have... What I'm trying to respond to
is when you said, what kind of questions did I have
and how did I feel when I didn't get an answer? Okay,
so the basic question was answered. He was
healthy. Now I don't want to know, I don't want to
pry about where did he get these things, changes in
his life. He was healthy. In terms of the current
reality, everything was okay. Let's not bother
about the rest of it. So then, those early years of
our marriage, very seldom did questions come up
about any past history. And in my perception of
things during those subsequent years and the next
six, seven, eight years, whatever, very little
came up in the way of necessity to threaten him
about going before any kind of authorities. I was
the front person in most all of our dealings, which
was very easy for me to do because I was up to that
point anyway, take care of all the financial
returns, take care of all the practicalities. If
we bought property, I filled out the forms. Faster
for me to do that. He was busy with his job or
whatever it was. I had access to telephone. So it
just was kind of a natural thing to do, to fall into
it. doing all of those things and then to skip way
ahead when the time came then many years later for
me to
Well, I guess the best way I can phrase it is after
many, many years of doing all of that for the whole
family, and then the kids are gone, and then later
on they're just the two of us, I became exhausted,
sick and tired of doing all the tax work and all this
stuff. And then I would put him in situations
where... Why doesn't he go do it? And he wouldn't do
it. So then my feeling of being, I was just, I'm just
used up. I'm just, why won't you do it? Then came the
hard questions. And the same in the areas of the
emotionality about things. I think my perception
was that he had used my emotionality about all of
these other things. He didn't have to reveal. how
or get caught in any kinds of traps about displays
of emotions or he was you know just and I'm all this
and I was just used up so now hard questions have to
come how come you don't want to do this why don't you
do that and not getting a satisfactory like you use
in cardboard response so there was a lot of years
when there was no confrontation about any of it
by uncertainty yeah yeah uh did you begin to notice
a breakdown of of uh defenses it seems to me i'm
getting the feeling that we're repressed i'm
getting the feeling that uh it was uh that dennis's
defenses were either breaking down or showing you
light in between them somehow that would
encourage you to ask more, to demand more. It
sounds as if he was almost saying, press a little
harder and maybe we'll... That he was trying to
cooperate on the inside, and you were trying to get
to it on the outside, but that this wall that had
been built up over years prevented you both from
touching each other. That's quite possible. I
think just in general terms, people get locked
into whatever roles and responsibilities that
sort of... sometimes by default. A lot of his
responses to my behavior fit very well into this,
because I was used to be the aggressive one, the
business woman, and whether he even offered to do
it, he may not have had a chance to. I might have just
done it anyway. But you don't see a point at which it
was starting to become that you sensed that he was
trying to cooperate from the inside,
Well, I thought that we always discussed these
difficult matters, and that the fact that you
actually went ahead and did it, like the actual,
like the phoning and the setting up of the
appointments and so on, I think that came much
later in our marriage. I tried to be as supportive
as I could in other ways, other than the actual
doing of it. And obviously there was a lot of other
kinds of... It's not anything that I enjoyed.
That's a very bad part of being a... You're not a
whole person. You're lucky. You try to be as whole
as you can. I was trying to be as whole as I could. And
the rest, like if I was three-quarter whole, I
felt, well, that's me. The best you can ask for. The
best you can hope for. That's the best I can ask for.
And not to... well over the last quarter when you
got three quarters and then later on i got more
compassionate when i heard you read enough about
the other unfortunate people and of course three
quarters And my basic approach to that was, I'd say
it to myself, you can only get so much, whatever is
there of the person is all you can get. If there
isn't any more, you will not get any more. Maybe
he's just dull. Maybe that's all there was. Maybe
he's dull. And I accepted that because he was such a
good person, and I've said that in so many ways to so
many people. his basic integrity his goodness all
of those kinds of things you know he's kind he's all
these other things so if there was if there was only
this kind of level of affect coming maybe that's
okay and i would have to deal with whatever might
end up being deficiencies to me i'd have to deal
with it in some other manner and that was okay for a
long time but then it wasn't anymore what changed
it I think I indicated there were several crises in
my life going on. In her life? In my life. I felt like
I was just going to be used. I was used up. Where did
you find Dr. Bernstein's name, Mark Bernstein?
No, we belonged to, as part of my benefit package. I
have a health plan with one of the major clinics in
Honolulu. And he was one of the staff
psychiatrists. What building? A major building
down south? So it's called Straub Clinic. It's a
big clinic on South King Street in Honolulu.
Straub Clinic. S-T-R-U-B.
Tell me what, when you finally When the final
crisis finally came, 1980,
summer of 80,
you have both seen Dr. Bernstein? No, no. We didn't
see him until about September. Oh, wait a minute.
Then I have the chronology wrong. I'm saying in the
summer of 80, when I found out about Cheryl and I
came back from Colorado, I was already set for the
retirement. Yes. And come to, you know, whatever
anxieties you go through on a career change. And
when I came back from that, and I had been in a
depressive kind of phase for, well, maybe a year
and a half to that time, but, you know, functional.
Yeah. Go to work and do all those things. Sure. I've
done it. And when I came back from that, I had no
energy left. That's just it. So I went on that
basis. to Dr. Bernstein and kind of got him
involved, come in and help me out, you know. So you
were going about the summer of 80 to Dr. Bernstein?
September of 81, this is. September of 81? Yeah,
I'm sorry, I'm not sure. No problem. September of
81, you started going to Dr. Bernstein? Mm-hmm.
And how long before you could get Dennis into it?
fairly soon after that a couple of two or three
sessions as i recall well he didn't hang back and
how did you respond then as to uh dr bernstein's
probing. You said that it had a major impact, even
though you didn't tell anybody. Yeah, it did. It
seemed to have been amazing. I didn't really think
much of these psychiatrists' methods, but I guess
they do work. They do open up things, and of course
they're quite painful. They break down these
walls that you build up. But it's... It's hard to
leave, but then you do manage
to survive, and then probably are better for it,
because you've broken down some walls, maybe, and
that's, you now have a bigger room. Somehow that
seems to make it work. About how long did you go?
From September to February. No, September to
about January. Once a week or so. Then Dennis
stopped going. He didn't want to be changed. This
now, you remind me, you said, you know, what caused
the final kind of thing, and I had said something
about I figured this was the end, there wasn't
going to be any more change. He had told me in
absolute terms, as far as I was hearing, that he
would not go back to Dr. Bernstein anymore. He felt
that he was perfectly alright and there was no
reason, he wasn't going to be changed anymore.
And I remember this one session I went into, Dr.
Bernstein and I, you know, I was coming on my own.
There was no more of this marital counseling. It
was just going to be, which, you know, so I needed it
anyway, but okay. It wasn't what I had in mind. And I
remember Dr. Bernstein looking at his records and
he said, well, let's see now. You have only on your
medical plan, you have two more visits, something
like that. I just thought, oh, And I finished the
session and I'll go to the office. I'm never going
to go back either. He was about, at that point,
about the, I considered my last friend, if you
will, the only one in the world I had left that would
be concerned enough about me to, for any reason,
and he's putting a price tag on it, which, I mean, in
reality, of course, there is, but I don't need
that. All the rest of this, I certainly can endow
along with it, so I just wasn't going to go back. And
then that's about within the next week or so came
our final separation kind of scene and then as I
mentioned to you then after that There's this
relief, kind of all these, you know, floods of
emotions, and kind of being able to come together
on that. And then I went back one more time to tell
Dr. Bernstein what had happened and what the story
then was, and then that's the rest of it. So that was
about January, February, March of... It was two
years ago. I've been in 82. March of 82, we're there
about March, April 82. Mm-hmm. In March 1982, tell
me what the home, what your house looked like. You
were living on the 12th floor. In the Hawaiian
Princess. The Hawaiian Princess. It's a
condominium complex? Condominium. Lahi Lahi
Point. Lahi Lahi. Lahi Lahi Point, where Prince
Makaha would dive off to meet his amakua, the
shark. I see. I see. L-A-H-A, Lahi Lahi? Lahi Lahi.
L-A-H-I. L-A-H-I. L-A-H-I. I see. And it was a
beautiful home. I get the feeling of a balcony
three-quarters of the way around the... It had a
wraparound lanai, call it. Lanai? Lanai,
L-A-N-A-I-N-A-I-N-A-I.
And at that moment, you were still working for
Mutual of New York? No, no. Oh. That was, I was
working for Hawaii Refugee Resettlement Agency.
Got it. It was the fairly new, fairly new executive
at that time. How far from work were you? About 30
miles out. And you had to go into downtown Hawaii?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And when did you take that job? How
much earlier did you just take that job? In
November of 81, so I'd only been working there for
four months. How old was your brother? Sixteen.
Twelve. Good, good. Can you think of anything
since it is... Five minutes. Two minutes before
two. I wanted to ask you if it would be at all helpful
or... Any reason that you might want to talk to
Cheryl or Mark about anything? Their
recollections of anything? Well, my...
Perhaps we can talk even later on. We don't have to
do it at this moment. Because our memories, you
know, sometimes... I'm curious what the kids
thought of Dennis, and I'm curious whether they
saw in him survival techniques that they should
have benefited by or that seemed odd to them in the
United States? Well, they perfectly are. I'm sure
they'd be delighted to talk about it. That's nice.
And the book is going on? Yes. Good. I know you
mentioned Cheryl had not only a bad time with her
health. How is her health ultimately? She seems
fine now. She had the two year, supposed to be
checked every six months for two years. She passed
her two years exam.
But then in June, it's now a half year later, two and
a half years later, she said no sign of recurrence.
But the ugly part about melanoma is that it could be
years. Well, we're all in the same boat. No one
knows whether we're not going to fall down
outside. You know, life goes on as usual, and she's
very healthy. all the problems are going to be
taken care of eventually. It could happen in a
traffic accident. And so there was always the
chance that I didn't have to make any decision. The
confrontation would never come. Yes, you could
just keep putting the confrontation off until the
guy with the scythe comes across. And Cheryl...
You said also had a difficult emotional time
trying to commit suicide? Well, she didn't know
over to act, but it got, she threatened it. Oh, I
see. When we were going off on our, going off to get
married, just, you know, lip service. Okay, okay.
I thought it was something much more serious. They
always thought, including Jean, that I was the
perfect, perfect mate for Jean because She's a
very, I don't know what the terminology is, but
with her, what you might call wild ideas of running
and moving and dropping out and going out in the
blaze and not really meaning any of this. But I
don't know. Nobody knows for sure. But it's
constantly being threatened, you know. And all
the vendettas would just stand there and sip this
martini and smile, you see. And they said, you
know, there's like an anchor. You know, here are
these people all going to shoot up. You know what
Cheryl said to us? When we left the other day,
Cheryl was sitting down. She said, Mom, you
know... I'm really feeling kind of a struggle now.
I'm feeling this sort of role reversal. Should you
always think that your parents are going to be some
kind of stability? And I never was, and now I'm the
only stable one. She says, I have a home and a family
here, and I'm really trying hard to get my head
together. And she said, I just wish I had,
sometimes I wish I had normal parents. And then she
looked kind of chagrined.
Let me ask you about the period when you were
drinking a lot. Is it brought about by these same
problems, or just boredom, or it's not important?
Oh, well, when we live in California, we're just
like the affluent society. Everybody had their
martinis, and after a while, I had Actually, gin
makes me a little ill. So then we switched to vodka.
Our friends had martinis. As you get older, then
everybody's kind of... We got together,
everybody. Martinis, steaks, and salads was the
thing. And fortunately, neither one of us can
drink after we eat. So it's all over with by 8
o'clock. You know, you have a couple of cocktails
before dinner. We enjoy wine. And then that's it.
But it's, you know, when I say a lot, every night is a
lot, if you don't hear that. But as far as having
a... I should kind of briefly mention that name,
Alice McIntyre. Oh, she stood up for us at our
wedding. She stood up for us at the wedding, and she
was one of the really brightest women I have ever
had the pleasure of being with. She was the office
manager for Clark Door Company, an absolute
savior as a backup for my work. She would
straighten out all the billing and all the
complaints while I was out on the road. So
influential
is what you're saying?
just incredible i haven't had one since like that
but the drinking was not uh a period we'd get
together with them it was it was never to the point
that we were ever not functioning right or that it
became evidently of some concern but not nothing
um a concern as we got older from a health
standpoint yeah you start reading you know gee
maybe we shouldn't drink this actually it
diminishes or it Your mineral supply gets
diminished. All these kinds of things. Sex drive
hasn't helped a lot either. Well, I'm sure that's
understandable. How do you see Dennis? If you were
telling a close girlfriend, and it doesn't have to
be honest, You're going to see all these things
before they ever get to the point where... I'm not
worried about that. I mean, I'm either going to be
upfront about it or I'm not going to say it at all.
How do you see Dennis? If you were describing
Dennis to a close girlfriend or to your mother, if
you would... very close, you would say? My very
first and foremost reaction is I have always
considered him a very substantial person. That's
extremely important to me, is a feeling of
substance about somebody I can really get a big arm
for. He's really... Despite the fact that you feel
that you took over a lot of responsibility?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. the part that made me angry was not
that he, I didn't think he couldn't do it, that he
didn't have the mental capacity or the
imagination, whatever, but he wouldn't do it for I
could never come to terms with the reasons, the
discrepancy between, I think I mentioned that
earlier, his aggressiveness in many, many other
arenas, like sports, for example, to see him come
down the face of Squaw Peak and all these kind of
things, and yet this hanging back and, you know,
like... More pablum, more pablum, in so many other
areas. And, of course, by contrast, which I would
need to bring out, my own father, who was not this
stature, but who was such a substantial type
person in terms of the taking care part of his
family, And my mother is blithering. And my dad
would always put down the dollar bills on the table
every day for the food and tell her this, and you're
going to do this, and this, and this. And the life
was like all laid out. And so the confusion then for
me of seeing Dennis be so aggressive in many, many
other areas, but not everything that kind of
happened. Which now I can... You know, putting
pieces together diminishes much of the anger. Oh,
yes, I'll bet it will. Have you
anything to ask? I'm sure I'll think of something
between now and the next.